## Introduction

The goal of this hands-on session is to perform a copy number variation
analysis (CNV) on a normal/tumour pair of alignment files (BAMs)
produced by the mapping of Illumina short read sequencing data.

To ensure reasonable analysis times, we will perform the analysis on a
heavily subsetted pair of BAM files. These files contain just the first
60Mb of chromosome 5 but contain several examples of inferred copy
number events to enable interpretation and visualisation of the copy
number variation that is present in entire cancer genomes. `Sequenza` is
the tool we will use to perform this analysis. It consists of two
`Python` pre-processing steps followed by a third step in `R` to infer the
depth ratio, cellularity, ploidy and to plot the results for
interpretation.

In the second part of the tutorial we will also be using `IGV` to
visualise and manually inspect the copy number variation we inferred in
the first part for validation purposes. This section will also include a
discussion on the importance of good quality data by highlighting the
inadequacies of the workshop dataset and the implications this has on
analysis results.

## Prepare the Environment

We will use a dataset derived from whole genome sequencing of a
33-yr-old lung adenocarcinoma patient, who is a never-smoker and has no
familial cancer history.

The data files are contained in the subdirectory called `data` and are
the following:

>  `normal.chr5.60Mb.bam` and `normal.chr5.60Mb.bam.bai`

>  `tumour.chr5.60Mb.bam` and `tumour.chr5.60Mb.bam.bai`

These files are based on subsetting the whole genomes derived from `blood`
and `liver metastases` to the first 60Mb of chromosome 5. This will allow
our analyses to run in a sufficient time during the workshop, but it’s
worth being aware that we are analysing just 1.9% of the genome which
will highlight the length of time and resources required to perform
cancer genomics on full genomes!

Open the Terminal and go to the `cnv` working directory:

```bash
cd /home/bioinfo/cnv/
```

All commands entered into the terminal for this tutorial should be from
within the **`cnv`** directory.


Check that the `data` directory contains the above-mentioned files by
typing:

```bash
ls -l data
```

## Sequenza CNV Analysis

Sequenza is run in three steps. The first pre-processing step is run on
the final normal and tumour mapped data (BAM files) in order to walk the
genome in a pileup format (automatically generated by `samtools`). This
first step finds high quality sites in the genomes and extracts their
depth and genotype in the normal genome and calculates the variant
alleles and allele frequencies in the tumour genome. The second step is
to perform a binning on these sites to save space and analysis time in
the third step. Finally, the third step is run in `R` to normalise the depth
ratio between the normal/tumour genomes, infer cellularity and ploidy
and graphically output results for interpretation.
