## Sequenza CNV Analysis

Sequenza is run in three steps. The first pre-processing step is run on
the final normal and tumour mapped data (BAM files) in order to walk the
genome in a pileup format (automatically generated by `samtools`). This
first step finds high quality sites in the genomes and extracts their
depth and genotype in the normal genome and calculates the variant
alleles and allele frequencies in the tumour genome. The second step is
to perform a binning on these sites to save space and analysis time in
the third step. Finally, the third step is run in `R` to normalise the depth
ratio between the normal/tumour genomes, infer cellularity and ploidy
and graphically output results for interpretation.


### Step 1: Pre-processing – Walking the Genome

You DO NOT need to run this command. This has already been run for you.
If everything is running correctly, it will take approximately 40 minutes to run.

```bash
sequenza-utils bam2seqz \
-n data/normal.chr5.60Mb.bam \
-t data/tumour.chr5.60Mb.bam \
--fasta assets/human_g1k_v37.fasta \
-gc assets/human_g1k_v37.gc50Base.txt.gz \
-C 5:1-60000000 -o stage1.seqz.gz
```

Press tab after typing a few characters of a directory of filename to
auto-complete the rest. This makes entering long file names very quick.

Explanation of parameters:

  >  **-n**: the normal BAM  
  >  **-t**: the tumour BAM  
  >  **-\-fasta**: the reference genome used for mapping (b37 here)  
  >  **-gc**: GC content as windows through the genome (pre-generated and downloadable from the Sequenza website)  
  >  **-C**: specifies the genomic location to process  

Make sure the output file is the correct size by typing `ls -lhH` from the
Terminal window that you ran `Sequenza` from, there should be a file
called `stage1.seqz.gz` of the size ~395M.

You can look at the first few lines of the output in the file
`stage1.seqz.gz` with:

```bash
zcat stage1.seqz.gz | head -n 20
```

This output has one line for each position in the BAMs and includes
information on the position, depths, allele frequencies, zygosity, GC in
the location.
